# Introduction

In this chapter, we will start a new project, switch over to Docker, add a custom user model, and write our first tests. Let's start by creating a new Django project. From the desktop create a new directory called `ch4-bookstore` and then create and activate a new Python virtual environment. From there we will install both Django and the `psycopg2-binary` adapter necessary to connect to a PostgreSQL database.

```sh
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install django~=4.0.0 psycopg2-binary==2.9.3
django-admin startproject django_project .
python manage.py runserver
```

On the command line you will likely see a warning about "18 unapplied migration(s)". It’s safe to ignore this for now since we're about to switch over to Docker and PostgreSQL.

Lastly stop the local server with Control+c and in your text editor create a `requirements.txt` file with the current contents of our Python virtual environment.
```sh
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

## Docker

We can now switch over to Docker in our project. Go ahead and stop the local server and also exit the virtual environment shell.

Docker should already be installed and the desktop app running from the previous chapter. We will need a `Dockerfile` for our image and a `docker-compose.yml` file to run the container. 

In your text editor create a new `Dockerfile` and `docker-compose.yml` file in the base directory next to the existing `manage.py` file. Then add the following code to each.

```dockerfile
# Pull base image
FROM python:3.10.4-slim-bullseye
# Set environment variables
ENV PIP_DISABLE_PIP_VERSION_CHECK 1
ENV PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE 1
ENV PYTHONUNBUFFERED 1
# Set work directory
WORKDIR /code
# Install dependencies
COPY ./requirements.txt .
RUN pip install -r requirements.txt
# Copy project
COPY . .
```

```yml
version: "3.9"

services:
  web:
    build: .
    command: python /code/manage.py runserver 0.0.0.0:8000
    volumes:
      - .:/code
    ports:
      - 8000:8000
    depends_on:
      - db
  db:
    image: postgres:13
    volumes:
      - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data/
    environment:
      - "POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust"
volumes:
  postgres_data:
```

```dockerignore
.venv
.git
.gitignore
```

Now we can build our image and run the containers with one command.
```sh
docker-compose up -d --build
```

Go to the web browser now at `http://127.0.0.1:8000/` and click refresh.

## PostgreSQL

The last step is switching over to PostgreSQL. Even though we already installed `psycopg2-binary` and have PostgreSQL available in our `docker-compose.yml` file, we still must explicitly tell Django what DATABASE to use which we can do in the `django_project/settings.py` file. Remember that by default Django will use a SQLite database instead. 

```python
DATABASES = {
	"default": {
		"ENGINE": "django.db.backends.postgresql",
		"NAME": "postgres",
		"USER": "postgres",
		"PASSWORD": "postgres",
		"HOST": "db", # set in docker-compose.yml
		"PORT": 5432, # default postgres port
	}
}
```

Make sure to refresh the web browser for the homepage to confirm everything still works

## Custom User Model

We will implement a custom user model that the official Django documentation "highly recommends." Why? Because you will need to make changes to the built-in User model at some point in your project's life and if you have not started with a custom user model from the very first migrate command you run, then you're in for a world of hurt because User is tightly interwoven with the rest of Django internally. It is challenging to switch over to a custom user model mid-project.

A point of confusion for many people is that custom user models were only added in Django 1.5. Up until that point the recommended approach was to add a OneToOneField, often called a Profile model, to User. You'll often see this set up in older projects.

However, a custom user model becomes a common approach. There are several implementation options: either extend `AbstractUser` which keeps the default User fields and permissions or extend `AbstractBaseUser` which is even more granular, and flexible, but requires more work.

We'll stick with the simpler `AbstractUser` in this book as `AbstractBaseUser` can be added later if needed.

There are four steps for adding a custom user model to our project:
1. Create a `CustomUser` model
2. Update `django_project/settings.py`
3. Customize `UserCreationForm` and `UserChangeForm`
4. Add the custom user model to `admin.py`

The first step is to create a `CustomUser` model which will live within its own app. I like to name this app `accounts`. Going forward we'll run the majority of our commands within Docker itself. Because we configured a volumes within the web service of `docker-compose.yml` any file system changes within Docker will be reflected in the local file system.

```sh
docker-compose exec web python manage.py startapp accounts
```

Create a new `CustomUser` model which extends `AbstractUser`. That means we’re essentially making a copy where `CustomUser` now has inherited all the functionality of `AbstractUser`, but we can override or add new functionality as needed. We're not making any changes yet so include the Python `pass` statement which acts as a placeholder for our future code.

```python
# accounts/models.py
from django.contrib.auth.models import AbstractUser
from django.db import models

class CustomUser(AbstractUser):
	pass
```

Now go in and update our `settings.py` file in the `INSTALLED_APPS` section to tell Django about our new accounts app. We also want to add a `AUTH_USER_MODEL` config at the bottom of the file which will cause our project to use `CustomUser` instead of the default `User` model.

Time to create a migrations file for the changes. We'll add the optional app name `accounts` to the command so that only changes to that app are included.

```sh
docker-compose exec web python manage.py makemigrations accounts
```

Then run migrate to initialize the database for the very first time.

```sh
docker-compose exec web python manage.py migrate
```

## Custom User Forms

A user model can be both created and edited within the Django admin. So we'll need to update the built-in forms too to point to `CustomUser` instead of User. In your text editor create a new file called `accounts/forms.py` and type in the following code to switch over to `CustomUser`.



