# [Web servers and HTTP (a primer)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/First_steps/Client-Server_overview#web_servers_and_http_a_primer)

Web browsers communicate with [web servers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_web_server) using the **H**yper**T**ext **T**ransfer **P**rotocol ([HTTP](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP)). When you click a link on a web page, submit a form, or run a search, the browser sends an _HTTP Request_ to the server.

This request includes:
- A URL identifying the target server and resource (e.g. an HTML file, a particular data point on the server, or a tool to run).
- A method that defines the required action (for example, to get a file or to save or update some data). The different methods/verbs and their associated actions are listed below:
    - `GET`: Get a specific resource (e.g. an HTML file containing information about a product, or a list of products).
    - `POST`: Create a new resource (e.g. add a new article to a wiki, add a new contact to a database).
    - `HEAD`: Get the metadata information about a specific resource without getting the body like `GET` would. You might for example use a `HEAD` request to find out the last time a resource was updated, and then only use the (more "expensive") `GET` request to download the resource if it has changed.
    - `PUT`: Update an existing resource (or create a new one if it doesn't exist).
    - `DELETE`: Delete the specified resource.
    - `TRACE`, `OPTIONS`, `CONNECT`, `PATCH`: These verbs are for less common/advanced tasks, so we won't cover them here.